The ZANU PF Secretary for Women’s Affairs, Honourable Cde Mabel Chinomona, the Women’s League Top Ten Management Committee, the National Executive Council of the ZANU PF Women’s League and the Women’s League’s entire membership, join the ANC family in mourning the passing on of a true revolutionary and freedom fighter, Cde Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, on 2 April 2018. We wish to express our deepest condolences to the family of Cde Winnie Madikizela-Mandela, the ANC Women’s League and the ANC Party as a whole on this sad loss of a dear Pan-African, gallant and fearless freedom fighter who distinguished herself during the Liberation Struggle to free South Africa. Indeed, the ZANU PF Women’s League was shocked and deeply saddened by the sad news of Cde Winnie’s untimely death. To us she was a dear colleague and torch bearer of the fight for the rights of oppressed women and the black people in South Africa in particular and Africa in general. The story of Nelson Mandela’s struggle against Apartheid would be incomplete without mentioning Cde Winnie Madikizela-Mandela ‘s role in the same struggle. She stood by her husband through thick and thin up to the bitter end. Cde Winnie Madikizela-Mandela was a people person, whose contribution to the liberation of South Africa and indeed the uplifting of the status and dignity of the black African woman in the region will forever be cherished. Winnie dedicated her entire life for the political and socio-economic development of her people before and after the attainment of independence in South Africa. Hers is a narrative of great and heroic deeds. To the ZANU PF Women’s League, she was a source of inspiration, a liberation icon and a role model of a brave woman fighter who worked tirelessly in support of women issues. Africa 10 general and particularly Former Liberation Movements will be poorer without her. She will be sadly missed by the entire progressive community. May her dear soul rest in eternal peace. Honourable Cde Mabel Chinomona
Secretary for Women’s Affairs
ZANU PF DEPARTMENT OF WOMEN’S AFFAIRS